.TH GDL 1 "2017-01-06" "The GDL Team"
.SH NAME
gdl \- GNU Data Language incremental compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gdl
.RI [\-\-help]
.RI [\-h]
.RI [\-\-version]
.RI [\-v]
.RI [\-V]
.RI [[\-]\-quiet]
.RI [\-q]
.RI [
\-arg 
value 
]
.RI [ 
\-args ... 
]
.RI [ 
\-e statement
]
.RI [ 
\-pref=/path/to/preferenceFile
]
.RI [ 
batch_file ... 
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gdl
is an incremental compiler for the GNU Data Language (GDL).  GDL is
being developed with the aim of providing an open\-source drop\-in
replacement for ITTVIS Interactive Data Language (IDL). It is also
partially compatible with Visual Numerics (VN) PV\-WAVE. IDL and
PV\-WAVE are registered trademarks of ITTVIS and VN, respectively.  GDL
and its library routines are designed as a tool for numerical data
analysis and visualisation.  GDL is dynamically typed, vectorized and
has object\-oriented programming capabilities.  The library routines
handle numerical calculations, data visualisation, signal/image
processing, file input/output (incl. graphical and scientific data
formats such as TIFF, PNG, netCDF, HDF etc) and interaction with host
OS.

Information on GDL/IDL/PV\-WAVE syntax and library routines can be
found in e.g.:

\- GDL documentation draft at: http://gnudatalanguage.sf.net/gdl.pdf

\- IDL manual on\-line @ NASA.gov:
http://idlastro.gsfc.nasa.gov/idl_html_help/home.html

\- ITTVIS (ittvis.com) and Visual Numerics (vni.com) websites

\- comp.lang.idl\-pvwave newsgroup

\- newsletter at: https://sympa.obspm.fr/wws/info/gdl-announces

A vast part of GDL library routines is implemented using open\-source
libraries including GSL, plPlot, and optionally: readline, FFTW, Eigen3,
ImageMagick, netCDF, HDF4, HDF5, libproj4, UDUNITS\-2, libps and
others.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help (or \-h)
Show summary of options
.TP
.B \-\-version (or \-v, \-V)
Show version of program
.TP
.B \-\-quiet (or \-quiet, \-q)
Suppress welcome messages
.TP
.B \-arg value
Tells COMMAND_LINE_ARGS() to report the following argument (may be
specified more than once)
.TP
.B \-args ...
Tells COMMAND_LINE_ARGS() to report all following arguments
.TP
.B \-e statement
Execute given statement and exit (last occurance taken into account
only, executed after startup file, may not be specified together with
batch files)
.TP
.B \-pref=/path/to/PreferenceFile
(only partially working now) setting using external text file few
variables including default preferences (e.g. X11 Windows Size)
.TP
.B \-\-fakerelease version
setting !VERSION.RELASE to that value. !VERSION.RELASE is often tested by
procedures to decide whether some function or option should be used. It is
sometimes possible to use this option to fool a procedure that request a
specific value of !VERSION.RELEASE
.TP
The \-demo, \-em, \-novm, \-queue, \-rt, \-ulicense and \-vm options
are ignored for compatibility with IDL.
.TP
A list of batch files to be executed before entering the interactive
mode (but after executing a startup file, if specified) may be given
when not using the \-e option.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B $DATADIR/gnudatalanguage/lib/*.pro
Library routines implemented in GDL. $DATADIR is specified during
compilation and usually translates to /usr/share, /usr/local/share or
alike. GDL includes this directory in its search path unless GDL_PATH
or IDL_PATH env. variables are set (see below).
.TP
.B $HOME/.gdl/history
A file used for storing the history of commands issued in the
interactive mode
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables have special meaning to
.BR gdl .
The
.B GDL_*
variant, if defined, takes precedence over any corresponding
.B IDL_*
variant.
.TP
.B GDL_PATH, IDL_PATH
The GDL command (script) search path.
.TP
.B GDL_STARTUP, IDL_STARTUP
A file of commands to be executed on startup.
.TP
.B GDL_TMPDIR, IDL_TMPDIR
A directory in which temporary files may be created.
.TP
.B HOME, SHELL
Variables influencing shell invocations from within GDL (SPAWN
procedure and the $ interpreter command).  Value of HOME determines as
well the location of the GDL history\-file.
.TP
.B PATH
Determines search path when spawning child processes using the SPAWN
procedure with the /NOSHELL keyword set.
.TP
.B PYTHONPATH
Influences behaviour of PYTHON procedure and PYTHON() function
(available if GDL is compiled with support for calling Python code)
.TP
.B GDL_MPI
A message to be sent out using MPI_Send before initialization of the
interpreter (available if GDL is compiled with support for MPI)
.TP
.B DISPLAY, XENVIRONMENT
Tell GDL how to connect to the X server
.TP
.B PLPLOT_DRV_DIR
Override the default location of PLplot dynamic drivers.
.TP
.B LC_*
The locale\-related settings accessible via LOCALE_GET() (GDL always
uses the C locale internally)
.TP
.B GDL_GR_WIN_HEIGHT
Sets the preference for the default height of a Windows(tm) graphic window
.TP
.B GDL_GR_WIN_QSCREEN
if set to true (1) this will prevent the use of the GDL_GR_WIN_HEIGHT and GDL_GR_WIN_WIDTH preferences and the default dimensions of graphic windows will be 1/4 of the screen dimensions
.TP
.B GDL_GR_WIN_WIDTH
Sets the preference for the default width of a Windows(tm) graphic window
.TP
.B GDL_GR_X_HEIGHT
Sets the preference for the default height of an X11 graphic window
.TP
.B GDL_GR_X_QSCREEN
if set to true (1) this will prevent the use of the GDL_GR_X_HEIGHT and GDL_GR_X_WIDTH preferences and the default dimensions of graphic windows will be 1/4 of the screen dimensions
.TP
.B GDL_GR_X_WIDTH
Sets the preference for the default width of an X11 graphic window
.TP
.B GDL_WX_BACKEND
can be set to [0,1,2] which will select, respectively, the backends 0,1 or 2 of plplot's old wxWidgets driver (plplot versions < 5.10). Backend 2 has antialiasing enabled.
.TP
.B GSHHS_DATA_DIR
If not automatically found, tells GDL where the gshhs files (coasts rivers, etc) are located.
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs, comments, patches or feature requests at
http://sf.net/projects/gnudatalanguage/
.SH AUTHOR
The primary author of GDL is Marc Schellens
<m_schellens@users.sourceforge.net>.  A list of contributors is
available in the AUTHORS file shipped with GDL, and on the project
website (see above).
.PP
The original version of this manual page was written by Sergio Gelato
<Sergio.Gelato@astro.su.se>.  It is currently a part of the GDL
package, and is maintained by the GDL Team.
.SH SEE ALSO
netcdf(3), hdf(1), gsl(3)
